        GRIB Viewer - program to visualise GRB format data


PURPOSE

To visualise data in GRIB files obtained from the DWDSAT service, the Norway & 
Denmark Ocean and Sea-Ice Satellite Application Facility (OSI-SAF), the Meteo-
France OSI-SAF, and selected UK Meteorological Office DPDS files.  For a fuller 
description, please see the program's Web page at:

  www.satsignal.eu/software/grib-viewer.htm


PC REQUIREMENTS

This software is intended for use on a 500MHz or better PC, with at least 256MB 
of memory.  Windows 95, 98, 98 SE and ME are not supported, and whilst the 
program may work, correct operation is not guaranteed.


REGISTRATION

A licence code is required to operate this software.  When you first run this 
software, it will work in full-function mode for a limited period of time, and 
cease working after that.  This limited period is designed for you to evaluate 
whether the software meets your needs or not.  If you want to carry on using 
the software after the evaluation period, you must buy a licence for the 
software.  You can purchase the licence from this Web site:

  www.satsignal.eu/software/reg-grib-viewer.html

Be sure to send me the Hardware Fingerprint key for your system.  You can get 
this by pressing the Enter Key button on the Reminder dialog which appears when 
you start the program.  When ordering, in Step 2 place this Hardware 
Fingerprint code in the Comments box provided.  Without the Hardware 
Fingerprint, I will be unable to issue you with a licence key.

Please note that the old licence codes will not work on this new version of the 
software, nor will the new licence keys work on the GRIB Viewer version 1.


VERSION UPGRADE

Version 2.0 of the GRIB Viewer marks a major advance in that data in the GRIB 
Edition 2 format is supported.  At the moment, this support is limited to the 
data sent over EUMETCast derived from Meteosat-8, and the Cloud Top Height 
(CTH), Cloud Analysis Image (CLAI), Cloud Mask (CLM), and Clear Sky Reflectance 
Map (CRM) data formats are accepted by the program.

- if you registered the GRIB Viewer after 2005 July 1, please contact me with 
your Hardware Fingerprint for a new licence key.

- if you registered the GRIB Viewer before July 2005 and wish to use the new 
facilities, you can upgrade to the new version here:

  www.satsignal.eu/software/reg-grib-viewer-upgrade.html

- if you do not wish to view the new GRIB Edition 2 products, you can continue 
to use your existing GRIB Viewer version 1, but please be aware that version 1 
will not be updated or have bugs fixed.


INSTALLATION AND USAGE

Extract the file GRIBViewer.exe and libtiff.dll to a sutiable location on your 
PC and run the program by double-clicking the file.  You can also create a 
shortcut on your desktop or in the start menu if you wish.  No further setup 
should be required.

If you get a message about missing DLLs, please download the runtime Library
Bundle from my Web site: www.satsignal.eu/software/runtime.html

For the display of country boundaries, a suitable data file is required:
  www.satsignal.eu/software/countries.zip

Unzip the Countries.dat file from the archive to the GRIBViewer.exe folder.


SUPPORTED DATA FILES

1 - GRB files from the DWDSAT service in TAR combined format, e.g.

  grb01-gme_euraaa_hptuw_030_000300-0406301200-rus3--EDZW.tar
  grb01-lm_uvi_024047_000-0407010000-rus3--EDZW.tar

Geographical mapping of the UV data is not supported.

2 - GRIB data from the Meteo-France OSI-SAF broadcast over EUMETCast, e.g.

  S-OSI_-FRA_-MULT-LMLDLI_FIELD-200502081430Z.grb.gz
  S-OSI_-FRA_-MULT-LMLSSI_FIELD-200502081430Z.grb.gz
  S-OSI_-FRA_-MULT-LMLSST_FIELD-200502080400Z.grb.gz
  S-OSI_-FRA_-MULT-MAPDLI_FIELD-200502081200Z.grb.gz
  S-OSI_-FRA_-MULT-MAPSSI_FIELD-200502081200Z.grb.gz
  S-OSI_-FRA_-NOAA-NARSST<area>_F-200502081200Z.grb.gz
    where <area> = ACOR, CANA, GASC, MNOR, MOCC, MORI, NORV  

3 - Norway and Denmark OSI-SAF sea-ice products including:

  Sea-ice edge, type and concentration, in 10 km resolution polar 
  stereographic grid covering the Atlantic part of the Arctic broadcast 
  over EUMETCast (S-OSI_-NOR) 
  Pre-production Northern hemisphere sea-ice over FTP (ICE_CONC_NH) 
  Pre-production Southern hemisphere sea-ice over FTP (ICE_CONC_SH) 

4 - Selected UK Met Office DPDS data

5 - GRIB2 data from the EUMETCast service, e.g.

  200703281145-clai.grb
  200703281145-clm.grb
  200703281145-crm.grb
  200703281145-cth.grb
  200703281145-div.grb
  200703281145-fir.grb
  200703281145-mpe.grb

6 - EUMETSAT MPE (Multi-sensor Precipitation Estimate) data from:

  http://oiswww.eumetsat.int/~idds/html/grib.html

7 - GRIB files produced in connection with the MaxSea service.

  http://comfr.maxsea.fr


Other GRIB files may be supported as the program is developed.  Registered users 
may submit requests by e-mail.


MULTIPLE DATA FILES

The file GRIBviewerGroups.ini is used to define groups of files that you want to 
open at the same time, as they contain related data which you would like to 
display simultaneously.  There are two sections in the file, a section called 
[FullName] which contains the names of files starting with the letters given, 
and a section called [NameEnding] which contains files which end in the same 
letters.  For example: in the section [FullName] (which would, more correctly, 
be called, NameStarting!), there is an entry:

  8=ICE_CONC,ICE_EDGE,ICE_TYPE

This means that opening a filename starting with the letters ICE_CONC would make 
the program try and look for files of the same time, but starting with ICE_EDGE 
and ICE_TYPE.  So if you opened the file:

  ice_conc_nh_200606091200.grb

the program would also open:

  ice_edge_nh_200606091200.grb
  ice_type_nh_200606091200.grb

if they were present on your system.  (These are sea-ice data downloaded by FTP 
from the OSI-SAF).  Similarly, in the [NameEnding] section, there is an entry:

  1=CLM.grb,CLAI.grb,CTH.grb

so opening the file:

  200608101445-clm.grb

would also make the program look for and open:

  200608101445-clai.grb
  200608101445-cth.grb

The entries in each section must be numbered sequentially - if there was an 8= 
and a 10=, the program wouldn't see the 10=, because it would look for the 9=, 
not find it, and stop searching.


INTERACTIVE OPERATION

- if you want to know the data values at your home station location, you can use 
the File, Setup (File, Setup station location) to define the latitude and 
longitude of your station.  Then you can right-click the status bar to move the 
cursor to that location and hence display the values there.


COMMAND-LINE OPERATION

The registered version of the program can take one to five parameters:

- parameter 1 is the name of the GRIB file to display

- parameter 2 can be either -SAVE, -SAVE:<folder-name> or -SAVE:<filespec>
- parameter 2 can be either -TEXT, -TEXT:<folder-name> or -TEXT:<filespec>

The remaining parameters can be in any order:

  -MIN   to run minimised

  -ZOOM    to force the zoom on
  -NOZOOM  to force the zoom off

  -BOUND:<none|dark|light>   to set boundary colour

  -SELECT:0,2,3   to save just tabs 0, 2 and 3

  -LEFT  define a region for ASCII output
  -TOP
  -WIDTH
  -HEIGHT

Images are saved as GRIBimage-0.jpg GRIBimage-1.jpg etc.  Images will be saved 
either in the same folder as the source data file or in the folder specified 
with the -SAVE:<folder> parameter.

Notes:

For the EUMETCast data, parameter 1 can be a wildcard, e.g.

  C:\MSG-1\Images\MPEF\*-cth.grb

For parameter 2:
  -SAVE uses default file names in the same folder as the source data
  -SAVE:<folder> uses default file names in the specified folder
    .. to make parameter 2 just a directory, be sure to add a trailing "\"
    .. a valid folder must be specified
  -SAVE:<filespec> 
    requires a full file spec (e.g. C:\DATA\my-result)
    allows date/time parameter substitution in output file name ..
    .. %YYYY %YY %MM %DD %HH %NN replaced by year, month etc.
    .. note that in a .bat or .cmd file you may need %%YYYY etc.
    .. example file spec: C:\Data\grib-%yyyy-%mm-%dd
    .. file type will be either .PNG or .JPG, no need to add

If parameter 2 is "-TEXT" rather than "-SAVE", the ASCII output format which is 
supported for only a limited number of data types is used.  The output file will 
have a .DAT file extension, regardless of what is specified.

If -SAVE is specified, the program will close after saving any images which have 
been created.  If no images were created (perhaps becuase of errors in the 
source data), the ERRORLEVEL environment variable will be set to 1.

If parameter 3 to 5 is omitted, it must be replaced by a dummy value, i.e.

  GRIBviewer <filename> -SAVE:D:\temp\  -MIN xx -BOUND:NONE

where parameter 4 is given the unrecognised value "xx"

Sample command using ASCII output and the region parameters:

    GribViewer.exe 200611091745-cth.grb -text:C:\Test\ -Left:1050 -top:120 -width:300 -height:180


NOTES

The program has been developed on Windows XP, and should run on Windows 2000 
and Vista.  It should also run on earlier versions of Windows but this is not 
supported.


RECENT RELEASE INFORMATION

Release V2.2.4.195
V2.2.4  2009 Apr 19  Support changed EUMETSAT MPE/Met-07 format
                     Support new OSI-SAF SST data files (NAR & GLB)

Older release information is in GRIBviewer-history.txt


LIMITATIONS

The user of the program is responsible for ensuring the accuracy of any data 
produced by the program.


WARRANTY

This program is provided "as is" and without any warranty as to merchantability 
or fitness for a particular purpose or any other warranties either expressed or 
implied.  The author will not be liable for data loss, damages, loss of profits 
or any other kind of loss while using or misusing this software.

This software may not be used in safety-critical or life-critical systems.


PROGRAM STATUS AND DISTRIBUTION

This program is copyrighted software from David J Taylor, Edinburgh and is 
provided "as is".

There is a self-help mailing list at:

  http://tech.groups.yahoo.com/group/SatSignal/

where other users of the software may be contacted.  I value any comments or 
suggestions for improvements you may have.  This program may only be distributed 
with the specific authority of the author.  If you want direct technical 
support, you must register the program at:

  www.satsignal.eu/software/reg-grib-viewer.html


COMMERCIAL USE

Use by any commercial organisation, or any individual for commercial purposes 
requires the purchase of a commercial licence from David Taylor, Edinburgh.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Many thanks to those who have provided data and helped beta test the program.

Created using the destructor.de LibTar library.


CONTACTING THE AUTHOR

Web site:  www.satsignal.eu
E-mail:    davidtaylor@writeme.com
Software self-help: http://groups.yahoo.com/group/SatSignal/

2009 Apr 19